## IN THE COURT OF APPEAL OF TANZANIA AT DODOMA

## CORAM: NDIKA, J.A.. MWANDAMBO, 3.A. And KAIRO. J.A.

## CIVIL APPEAL NO.  181 OF 2020

GEITA GOLD MINING LIMITED..................................................... APPELLANT

VERSUS

## COMMISSIONER GENERAL, TANZANIA REVENUE AUTHORITY...........................................RESPONDENT

(Appeal from the Judgment and Decree of the Tax Revenue Appeals Tribunal at Mwanza,)

(Twaib, J.)

dated the 1st day of October, 2012 in

Tax Appeal No. 4 of 2012

## JUDGMENT OF THE COURT

18th  October &amp; 2n d  November,  2021

## MWANDAMBO. J.A.:

Geita Gold Mining Limited, the appellant, is before the Court faulting the  decision  of  the  Tax  Revenue  Appeals  Tribunal  (the  Tribunal)  which upheld  the  decision  of  the  Tax Revenue  Appeals  Board  (the  Board) holding  the  appellant  liable  to  remit  Value  Added  Tax  (VAT)  on  fuel supplied to her contractor in the course of executing  her mining activities in Geita Region.

The facts giving  rise to the instant appeal are not in dispute. To the extent they  are  material  to  the  instant  appeal,  the  facts  run  as  follows: The appellant is a  holder of a  mining  licence for the operation  of a  gold

mine  in  Geita  Region.  As  part of the  incentives to  the  holders  of  mining licences,  the  Value  Added  Tax  Act, 1997,  Cap. 148  R.E. 2002  (now repealed)  [the  VAT Act]  granted  to  such  companies some tax  reliefs set out  in  the  schedule  thereto.  One  of  such  reliefs  was  exemption  from payment  of  VAT  on  fuel  imported  for  exclusive  use  in  their  mining activities.  Besides,  the  appellant  had  entered  into  a  Mining  Development Agreement (MDA) with the Government of Tanzania (GoT) granting some tax reliefs in her favour for the purpose of the mining activities.

Acting  under  the  tax  reliefs  as  aforesaid,  the  appellant  imported fuel for the  intended  purpose.  It is common ground that in the course of her  operations  of  the  gold  mine,  the  appellant  outsourced  some  of the activities  to  contractors.  Such  contractors  included  Geita  Power  Limited (GPL)  who  was  contracted  to  operate  an  electricity  power  station. DTP Terrassment  (DTP)  was  contracted  to  provide  mining  services on  behalf of  the  appellant.  Through  specific  agreements  with  its  contractors,  the appellant had an obligation to supply fuel to GPL and DTP whose charges were not included  in the rate charged  by the contractors for the services rendered.

At one time,  the  respondent conducted  a tax audit in the affairs of the  appellant which  revealed  that  she  supplied  fuel  to  GPL  and  DTP  for which VAT was chargeable but not remitted. Consequently, the

respondent  made  an  assessment  for  additional  VAT  in  the  sum  of TZS 6,256,005,237.00  which  the  appellant  objected  contending  that  no  VAT was  payable  for  the  fuel  she  supplied  to  the  contractors  by  reason  of exemption  from  such  liability.  The  respondent  rejected  the  objection maintaining  that the  exemption  from  payment  of VAT for  imported  fuel did  not  extend  to  the  appellant's  contractors.  He  maintained  the  same stance before  the Board  in  an appeal  by  the  appellant.  The Board sustained the respondent's contention in its judgment appearing at pages 144 -149 of the record of appeal.

The appellant's attempt to overturn the Board's decision  before the Tribunal  was  barren  of fruits.  The  appellant faulted  the  Board's decision on  three  grounds; one, disregarding  the MDA she  had  with  the  GoT; two, holding  that  there  was  a  taxable  supply  to  the  Contractors  in respect of fuel she supplied for exclusive use in the mining activities; and three, failing to  rule that the appellant enjoyed  relief from VAT pursuant to the Third Schedule to the VAT Act. The Tribunal did  not find  purchase in  any of the grounds.  In  its judgment (appearing at pages  197 -  207 of the  record  of  appeal),  the  Tribunal  sustained  the  Board's  decision  and dismissed  the  appeal.  The  Tribunal's  reasoning  in  ground  one  was  that despite the Board disregarding the MDA, such approach did  not have any bearing  on  the  ultimate  decision  in  the  appeal.  With  regard  to  ground

two,  the  Tribunal  concurred  with  the  Board  that  there  was  a  taxable supply  of fuel  to  the  appellant's  contractors  which  was  chargeable  with VAT.  It held thus that the appellant was liable to charge VAT for fuel she supplied to  her contractors the more so,  because,  according to a  sample invoice  to  GPL  (exhibit  Rl)  that  invoice  reflected  VAT  which  was  not remitted  to  the  respondent.  With  regard  to  ground  three,  the  Tribunal held that guided  by the principles commanding strict interpretation of tax statutes,  the VAT relief did  not extend  to  contractors  irrespective of the fact that such contractors were delivering mining services on behalf of the appellant.

In  this  appeal,  the  appellant  has  preferred  four  grounds.  The  first ground  faults  the  Tribunal  for  making  a  contradictory  finding  that  the MDA  was  binding  and  yet  holding  that  the  Minister  responsible  for Minerals  and Energy  had  no  power  to  enter  into  agreements  which provides  fiscal/tax reliefs under  section 15  of  the Mining  Act, 1979. Ground  two  faults the Tribunal  for  holding  that  the  fuel  supplied  to  the contractors for exclusive use in the appellant's mining activities constituted a vatable supply. In ground three, the appellant contends that the Tribunal  made an  error of law  by wrongly invoking the  provisions of section  58 of the VAT Act.  Finally, the appellant criticises the Tribunal for reading  and  interpreting  section  11  of  the  VAT  Act  without  regard  to Article 6 of the MDA.

At  the  hearing,  the  appellant  deployed  as  team  of  three  learned advocates  composed  of  Messrs.  Allan  Nlawi  Kileo,  Wilson  Mukebezi  and Stephen  Axwesso,  whereas,  the  respondent  had  a  consortium  of  three learned Senior State Attorneys; Mr. Hospis Maswanyia, Ms. Gloria Achimpota and Mr. Thomas Buki resisting the appeal.

Mr.  Kileo  who  took  the  lead,  adopted  the  written  submissions  he had  filed  earlier  on  pursuant  to  rule  106(1)  of  the  Tanzania  Court  of Appeal  Rules,  2009  (the  Rules)  before  addressing  us  orally  on  a  few issues for emphasis.  The  learned  advocate's focus  in  his oral  submission was on the relevance of our judgment in Geita Gold Mining Limited v.

Commissioner General, TRA, Civil  Appeal  No.89  of 2019  (unreported) (hereinafter to be referred to as the GGML  case) delivered on 15/06/2020;  two  months  before  the  filing  of  the  appellant's  written submissions.  That  judgment  arose  from  grounds  which  appear  to  be similar  to  the  facts  in  the  instant  appeal  but  was  not  referred  by  the learned advocates for the appellant in their written submissions. A copy of the  judgment  features in the respective lists of authorities by  the appellant and respondent filed few days before the hearing of the appeal.

To  start with,  Mr.  Kileo  was candid  that the  decision  in  GGML  had features common to those obtaining in the instant appeal;  supply of fuel to  third  parties  contracted  to  render  mining  services  on  behalf  of  the appellant who enjoyed tax relief on imported fuel for the exclusive use in her  mining  services.  However,  the  learned  advocate  pointed  out  some features  which,  according  to  him,  distinguished  that  decision  from  the facts in the instant appeal to wit;  existence of an  uncancelled tax invoice for  fuel  supply  in  the  former  whereas  the  invoice  in  the  instant  appeal through exhibit R1 had no such VAT element for fuel supplied to GPL.

The learned advocate  argued thc.c in the circumstances,, the supply of fits'  'ha  cppel'ant  mad:, to  GPL was for  ih®  exclusive  mining  services re ;c'".* . : ! sr.cl: .'n  hsr · ·r . c !   so  ! c   vvss  wrong  for the T'it- jnai  to  hold  as  it  did  that-there  was  a  vpceble  supply  within  the purview  of section  58  of  i:h£ VAT A c!:.  Taking  the  argument further,  the te?med advocate contenttecTlf&amp;i 'x A v T as '.'.a id   by the Tri'v c : R '? i  LiacSuseV the  biisfnsjc  was  i'C1  ? ? .*  tiie  st'pply. of  ,fua!  and,  in  so ; -; ins iue! £r»e^rp!:ea was mesr.  re .*  t r i Sxclus-ve n me mining ' . » ■ * * · * » · . . , ■   * . · ** sarvfces  covereo  by  section'll  and  the  Thifd  Stlleduie  to  the  VAT  Act regardless of whether it was  her or the contractors who performed  such services.  On  those  arguments?' Mr. Kileo "uigfcd 'ttie  Court" fo  hold  the

Court's decision in GGML involving the same parties was not applicable to the instant appeal and thus the appeal ought to be allowed with costs.

After  adopting  the  written  submissions  in  reply, Mr. Maswanyia invited  us to follow GGML case because it was decided on facts similar to the  instant  appeal.  He  down-played  the  distinction  pointed  out  by  Mr. Kileo  on  the  invoice  (exhibit  Rl)  and  argued  that  the  said  invoice  was merely  a  sample  invoice  which  proved  that  the  appellant  was  backcharging  the  supply  of  fuel  to  her  contractors.  According  to  him,  backcharging  was the same as selling  fuel to the contractors and  so,  section 58  of  the  VAT  Act  was  rightly  relied  on  by  the  Tribunal.  The  learned Senior State Attorney wound  up  his oral  submissions  urging the Court to dismiss the appeal on those submissions as well as the written submissions in reply.

Submitting  in  rejoinder,  Mr.  Kileo  had  three  arguments. One, the factual setting  in GGML case was different from the instant appeal. Two, Back-charging was meant to account for the fuel  as held  by the Tribunal because,  no  VAT  liability  accrued  for  fuel  supplied  to  the  contractors which explains why VAT was not charged and thus section 58 of the VAT Act was inapplicable considering that exhibit Rl reflects nil charge for VAT on  fuel. Three, the  contention  on  exhibit  R l  being  a  sample  has  been raised  for  the  first  time  in  this  appeal  and  so  the  onus  of  proof that  it indeed was, lies on the respondent.

For a  start,  we wish  to  state that having  examined the contents of the written submissions for and against, the counsel's oral submissions in the light of the grounds of appeal, we think the issue for our consideration and determination is narrow. It revolves around the correctness  or otherwise  of the Tribunals' decision  holding  that the  fuel supplied  to  the  contractors  was  a  taxable  supply  to  which  section  58  of the VAT Act applied.

We  shall  begin  our  discussion  with  the  merit  of  grounds  one  and four  conjointly.  Even  though  the  appellant  faults  the  Tribunal  for  the alleged  contradictory finding  on  the  MDA,  we  do  not think that there  is any  such  contradiction  in  the  judgment.  We  say  so  because,  upon  our closer examination of the Tribunal's decision at page 202 and  203 of the record  of  appeal,  all  that  the  Tribunal  said  was  that  despite  the  Board disregarding the MDA,  there  was  nothing  suggesting  that  the MDA created  an  automatic  right in  the  appellant to  enjoy fiscal  reliefs without more. The criticism against the Tribunal on the treatment of the MDA was misplaced  because,  as rightly held  by the Tribunal, the MDAs were to be followed by  specific  legal instruments  to  operationalise  them  on  the relevant  aspects.  In  the  course  of  our  research,  we  landed  upon  our

decision  in Resolute  Tanzania  Limited  v.  Commissioner  General, Tanzania Revenue Authority, Civil Appeal No 125 of 2017 {unreported)  which  appears  to  support  the  Tribunal's  decision  on  that aspect.  It  is  plain  that  the  MDAs  were  given  legal  effect  through  the relevant  Government  Notices  (GNs)  discussed  in  the  decision  that  is  to say;  The  Excise Tariff (Remission)  (Fuel  Imported  by  Mining  Companies) Order,  GN.  No.480  of 2002  and  Road  Fuel Tolls  (Remission)  (Holders of Mining  Licence for  Gold)  Order,  GN  No.  99  of 2005.  Accordingly,  we  do not see any serious issue in the MDA in the manner the Tribunal treated it as a basis for the tax relief but not an end in itself as it were.

In  any  event,  it  is  our  view  that  with  or  without  the  MDA,  the dispute  did  not  relate  to  the  appellant's  entitlement  to  VAT  relief  on imported fuel rather, whether that exemption extended to her contractors regardless  of  the purpose  of  the  use  of  the  fuel supplied  to such contractors.  Apparently,  the  respondent does not dispute the fact that in terms  of  section  11  of the  VAT  read  together  with  item  8  of the  Third Schedule thereto, the appellant was  relieved from VAT on  importation of fuel.  He only disputes the appellant's contention that such relief extended to  supplying  the  exempted  fuel  to  her  contractors  engaged  to  perform certain  mining services on her behalf free from VAT. Consequently, we do not see any  merit in the argument in support of issue (i) and  (iv) on the

power of the  Minister for Energy and  Minerals to enter into MDAs neither is  there  any  dispute  whether  the  MDA  was  binding  or  not.  We  thus dismiss grounds one and four for being devoid of merit which takes us to our discussion on ground two.

Ground  two  faults  the  Tribunal  for  holding  as  it  did  that  the  fuel supplied to contractors for exclusive use  on the appellant's mining activities constituted a vatable  supply. We  have  taken note  of  the contents  of the  written  submissions  supported  by  formidable  authorities from  foreign  jurisdictions  on  what  constitutes  a  vatable  supply  for  the purposes of VAT in other countries whose legislation is similar to ours. We have also taken  into account the respondent's submissions in  reply.  With respect,  we  do  not think  we  need  belabour  with  any  of the  authorities since  there  is  no  disagreement  on  the  general principle  as  to  what constitutes a vatable supply in the light of the issue for our consideration and determination; whether  the  fuel the appellant supplied to her contractors constituted a vatable supply.

Our starting point will  be section  11  of the VAT Act which  provided as follows:

"  The persons and organisations listed in  the  Third Schedule to this Act shall be entitled to relief from  VAT within the  lim its  and  conditions  prescribed  in that

## Schedule subject to procedures which may be determined by the Minister."

The  relevant  provision  in  the  third  schedule  is  paragraph  8  which granted  reliefs  targeted  to importation  by  or  supply  to  a  registered licensed drilling, mining, exploration or prospecting company  of equipment  to be used  solely  for drilling, mining, exploration or prospecting activities. It is common ground that paragraph 8 of the third schedule  applied  to  the  appellant.  In  its  judgment,  the  Tribunal  made reference to the provisions of section  11 of the VAT Act and stated:

"The section is dear: it talks o f relief from VAT  on "importation by"  and  "supply  to"  a registered mining company. As the Board correctly  found, the section does  not  cover "supplies  by" such company  to  any  other person,  including its contractors,  as is the case herein". [   at  page 204 o f  the record].

We respectfully agree with the above being satisfied that it reflects a correct interpretation of the law.  Having so said, we shall  proceed to a discussion on the application of GGML case to the instant appeal.

As  alluded  to  earlier,  the  learned  counsel  made  no  reference  to our decision in GGML case in their respective written submissions but did so  in  their  oral  address.  Briefly the  facts  in  that case  were  that,  like  in

the instant appeal,  a  dispute  arose  as to the appellant's failure to  remit VAT to  the  respondent  on  the  supply  of  excessive  fuel  to  M/s  Golden Construction  Company  Ltd  who  was  contracted  to  run  the  Geita  Gold Mine  Power  Station  for  the  generation  of  electricity  to  her  mine.  The appellant's  objection  premised  on  the  tax  relief  was  rejected  by  the respondent maintaining that the appellant was liable to charge and remit VAT on invoices for fuel supplied to her contractor. The Board sustained the  respondent's  stance  and  dismissed  the  appeal  so  did  the  Tribunal. The  appellant  appealed  to  this  Court  on  four  grounds.  Ground  one faulted the Tribunal for holding that the VAT was payable on excess fuel utilized  by  M/s  Gold  Construction  Company  Limited  to  run  her  power station  whereas in  ground two,  she criticised the Tribunal's decision  for holding that the supply of fuel to the operator of the power station was a vatable supply.

From grounds one and two, the Court framed one issue; whether or not there  was  a  vatable  supply  of fuel  between  the  appellant  and  Gold Construction  Limited  (GCL).  In  determining  the  issue,  the  Court  took cognisance  of  the  undisputed  fact  that  the  appellant  had  prepared  an invoice  for  fuel  reflecting  VAT  which  was  subsequently  cancelled  even though the amount claimed  as VAT was not remitted  to the  respondent. Before coming to the conclusion  on the issue, the Court agreed  with the

Tribunal  and  the  Board  on  two  pertinent  findings; One, there  was  no dispute that the appellant supplied fuel  to  GCL in the  furtherance of her business. Two, the  appellant  supplied  fuel  to  GCL  in  pursuance  of  an agreement  in  which  she  was  not  privy;  such  supply  amounted  to  a vatable  supply  evidenced  by  an  invoice  and  thus  the  appellant  was  not exempt from  payment  of VAT  in  terms  of sections  4  (1)  and  58  of the VAT Act.  Having  been  satisfied  that the  appellant  had  issued  an  invoice without  remitting  the  relevant  VAT  on  a  vatable  supply  as  required  by section  58 of VAT Act, the Court concluded that there was no room for a contrary interpretation of the law exempting her from VAT liability.

There  is  no  dispute  that  the  Court's  decision  in  the  above  stated case was  influenced by, as shown  above, existence of an invoice reflecting  VAT  for  the  fuel  supplied  to  GCL  in  agreement  in  which  the appellant was not privy. It is clear from the judgment that considering the undisputed  existence  of  an  invoice  reflecting  VAT,  the  appellant  was bound to remit VAT to the respondent. Apparently, this is not the case in the  instant  appeal  where,  the  supply  of  fuel  was  made  to  contractors under  undisputed  agreements.  Besides,  unlike  in  that  case,  exhibit  Rl shows vividly that there  was  nil  charge  for  VAT on  fuel  as  can  be  seen from  page  129  -134  of the  record  of  appeal.  To  that  extent,  we  would respectfully agree with  Mr.  Kileo that there are some features in the two

cases  which  may  limit  the  application  of  the  decision  to  the  instant appeal. All the same, the pertinent question remains, did the supply made to the appellant's contractors constitute a taxable supply?

Fortunately, we are not traversing  in a virgin territory in  relation to supplies of fuel  made by holders of mining licences such as the appellant. A similar issue arose in Resolute Tanzania  Limited (supra). That case involved a dispute on the refund to the appellant of excise duty on fuel as well  as  road and fuel  toll  in  relation to fuel  used  by contractors and  sub­ contractors employed  by  Resolute  in  its  mining  operations  premised  her argument on not only the MDA with the GoT but also specific Government Notices.  G.  N.  No.480  of  2002  remitted  the  whole  of  the  excise  duty payable on fuel imported or purchased prior to clearance  through customs by or on  behalf of mining companies for use solely for mining of minerals  meant for export.  On  the  other  hand,  para  2 of G.N  No.  99  of 2005,  made  the  order  applicable  to  holders  of  mining  licences  for  gold who had entered into  MDAs with the GoT.  Resolute was such a  holder of mining licence for gold to which the order applied.  In terms of para 3 (1) of G.  N.  No.  99  of 2005,  the  road  and  fuel  tolls  payable  on  imported  or purchased gas oils exceeding United States Dollars 200,000 were remitted in favour  of  a  holder  of  a  mining  licence  for  gold  which  is  required exclusively for use in the production of gold  minerals. In the course of its

gold mining operations, Resolute supplied fuel to her contractors and sub­ contractors employed to do mining activities on  her behalf. In terms of G. N.  No. 99 of 2005, Resolute sought a refund on the remitted fuel to which the  respondent  refused.  On  appeal,  the  Board  ruled  in  favour  of  the appellant holding that the remission on the fuel that Resolute supplied to her  contractors  for  exclusive  use  in  the  mining  operations  extended  to apply  to  her  contractors.  It  thus  ordered  the  respondent  to  make  the refund. On  appeal by  the respondent,  the  Tribunal  overturned  that decision which  resulted  into an appeal to this Court. The critical  issue for the determination  of the appeal  was whether or  not the contractors and sub-contractors enjoyed the remission relief in terms of the GNs to entitle Resolute to the  refund  she  obtained  from  the  respondent.  Rejecting  the arguments by the advocate for Resolute premised on purposive approach of statutory interpretation, the Court stated: -

"...we are o f  settled mind that,  the language used in  GNs  is  unambiguous  having  clearly perm itted sorely the appellant to  use  the rem itted fuel and oil  for  mining  subject  to  a  strict  condition  that, where  the  remitted  fuel  is  used  by  those  not entitled,  the  remission  order shall cease  to  have effect... the remission under  the GNs  solely covered  the  appellant  and  not  her  agents  and contractors... "[at page 14].

It  is  common  ground  that  both  Resolute  and  the  appellant  had entered  into  MDAs  with  the  GoT and  thus covered  by the  GNs.  Besides, both enjoyed special tax reliefs under the VAT Act read together with the Third  Schedule  thereto; remission  on  VAT  for  imported  fuel  for  the exclusive  use  in  the  mining  activities.  In Resolute's case  (supra),  the Court  refused  to  extend  the  remission  to  the  contractors  in  relation  to road  toll  and  fuel  toll  enjoyed  in  pursuance  of G.  N   No.99  of 2005.  The instant  appeal  relates  to  a  special  relief on  VAT  for  imported  fuel  used solely  by  the  appellant's  mining  activities.  In  our  view,  in  so  far  as  the appellant supplied fuel to  her contractors who  had  no similar exemption, we  are,  with  respect,  in  agreement  with  the  Tribunal  that  the  special relief by way of exemption from payment of VAT on imported fuel did not cover  the  appellant's  contractors.  As  rightly  held  by  the  Tribunal,  the supply of fuel  to  the  appellant's contractors constituted  a  taxable supply for  which  the  appellant  was  bound  by  section  58  of the  VAT to  charge VAT from the contractors for the supply and remit it to the respondent. In our view, the fact that the appellant's invoice by way of exhibit R1 did not reflet VAT on fuel compared to what transpired in GGML case does not by itself absolve  her  from  the  liability  in  so  far  as  the  supply  of fuel  to  her contractors was a taxable supply under the VAT Act.

In  the  upshot,  we are  constrained to  dismiss ground  two for being devoid  of  merit.  Having  dismissed  ground  two,  there  will  be  no  useful purpose  discussing  ground  three  premised  on  the  application  of section 58  of  the  VAT  Act.  That  ground  is  devoid  of  merit  and  is  likewise dismissed.

In  fine,  we  find  no  merit  in  the  appeal  and  we  dismiss  it  in  its entirety with costs.

DATED at DODOMA this  1s t  day of November, 2021.

## G. A.  M.  NDIKA JUSTICE OF APPEAL

## L. J. S.  MWANDAMBO JUSTICE OF APPEAL

## L. G.  KAIRO JUSTICE OF APPEAL

The  Judgment  delivered  this  2n d   day  of  November,  2021  in  the presence of Mr.  Noah Tito,  Senior State Attorney for the respondent and also  holding  brief  of  Mr.  Allan  Nlawi  Kileo  for  the  appellant,  is  hereby certified as true copy of the original.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->