GN. NO. 714 (Contd.)

GOVERNMENT NOTICE No. 714 Published On. 8/10/2021

## THE VALUE ADDED TAX ACT (CAP 148)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

## REGULATIONS

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

(Made under section 94)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (GENERAL) (AMENDMENT) REGULATIONS, 2021

Citation and commencement GN. No. 225 of 2015

- 1.-(1)  These  Regulations  may  be  cited  as  the Value Added Tax (General) (Amendment) Regulations, 2021  and  shall  be  read  together  with  the  Value  Added Tax (General) Regulations,  2015  hereinafter  referred  to as 'principal Regulations'.
- (2)  These  Regulations  shall  be  deemed  to  have come into operation on the 1 st day of July, 2021.
- 2. The  principal  Regulations  are  amended  by deleting regulations 36A  and  substituting for it the following new Regulations-

'Procedures for goods transferred to Mainland Tanzania

- 36A-(1). Subject to section 3(4) of the Act, the goods transferred from  Tanzania  Zanzibar  to  Mainland Tanzania shall be cleared through ports  of  entry  in  Mainland  Tanzania and charged value added tax equal to the difference between the value added tax rate applicable in Mainland Tanzania and that of Tanzania Zanzibar.
- (2) For purposes of this regulation 'transfer' means transfer of goods from Tanzania Zanzibar to Mainland Tanzania.'.

Amendment of regulations 36A

GN. NO. 714 (Contd.)

| Amendment of regulation 36B   | 3. The principal Regulations are amended by deleting regulation 36B and substituting for it the       |
|-------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Amendment of Schedule         | 4. The Schedule to the principal Regulations is amended by adding Form ITX 653.01.E at the end of the |

GN. NO. 714 (Contd.)

\_\_\_\_\_\_

## SCHEDULE

\_\_\_\_\_\_

(Made under regulation 36B(1))

Form No. ITX 653.01.E

## APPLICATION FOR REFUND OF VAT ON GOODS SOLD TO REGISTERED PERSONS IN ZANZIBAR

<!-- image -->

TO:

Commissinioner General

P.O. BOX 11491,

DAR ES SALAAM

## APPLICATION FOR  REFUND OF VAT ON GOODS SOLD TO VAT REGISTERED PERSONS IN ZANZIBAR

I…………………………..........................(the Commissioner  of Zanzibar Revenue Board) apply for refund of  Tanzania Shillings ...................................... being amount of  VAT  collected  by  Tanzania  Revenue  Authority  on  behalf  of  Zanzibar  Revenue Board on account of goods sold to VAT Registered Persons in Tanzania Zanzibar for the  month  of……………………………..(state  month(s)and  year)  as  provided  for under Section 3(4) of the Value Added Tax Act, Cap.148.

## Declaration

I DO CERTIFY that the above information/data are correct and I undertake to confirm that  the  said  goods  were  purchased  in  Mainland  Tanzania  by  Registered  Persons  in Zanzibar and transfered from Mainland Tanzania for sale in Zanzibar as per attached Schedule and supporting documents.

.......................................                     ...................                 ......................................

Name of Authorised Officer

Signature

Date and

GN. NO. 714 (Contd.)

## Official Stamp

## NOTE:

To be submitted in triplicate

GN. NO. 714 (Contd.)

ITX653.01.E. Application for Refund of VAT on Goods sold to Registered Persons in Zanzibar

## ATTACHMENT TO THE VAT REFUND CLAIM FORM

GN. NO. 714 (Contd.)

NB:  To be attached with the following particulars as stipulated under Regulation 36B(2).

- (a) a tax invoice generated by Electronic Fiscal Device (EFD) showing the name, Taxpayer's Identification Number  and Value Added Tax Registration Number  of the customer registered in Tanzania Zanzibar;
- (b) landing certificate;
- (c) Single Administrative Document/Customs Declaration Form (IM 9); and
- (d) Transire discharge  result report.

Dodoma, 23 rd

September, 2021

MWIGULU LAMECK NCHEMBA MADELU Minister for Finance and Planning